O(3) transformations
=====================

The :py:mod:`metatomic.torch.o3` module rotates and inverts
:py:class:`~metatomic.torch.System` and :py:class:`~metatensor.torch.TensorMap`
objects, for example to generate randomly rotated copies of a structure for data
augmentation.

.. _o3-conventions:

Conventions
-----------

To transform a :py:class:`~metatensor.torch.TensorBlock`,
:py:func:`transform_block` and :py:func:`transform_tensor` inspect its component
axes. Blocks without component axes are scalar; Cartesian and spherical axes are
identified by name:

- Cartesian axes are named ``xyz`` or ``xyz_1`` through ``xyz_9``. They are
  transformed directly with the (3, 3) matrix :math:`R` passed to
  :py:class:`O3Transformation`, following the column-vector convention
  :math:`v' = Rv` (equivalently, ``values_transformed = values @ R.T`` because
  values are stored as rows). Their component labels must be ``[0, 1, 2]`` in
  :math:`x, y, z` order.
- Spherical axes are named ``o3_mu`` or ``o3_mu_1`` through ``o3_mu_9``. Their
  :math:`\ell` and :math:`\sigma` values are read from the correspondingly
  suffixed ``o3_lambda`` and ``o3_sigma`` dimensions in the block key. For
  angular momentum :math:`\ell`, component labels must run from :math:`-\ell`
  through :math:`+\ell` in ascending order. These axes use the real Wigner-D
  convention described below.

At most ten component axes are supported in one value or gradient block. Other
component-axis names are rejected. These metadata requirements also apply to
blocks without samples.

An :py:class:`O3Transformation` stores a copy of its input matrix. Modifying the
original tensor therefore does not change the transformation.
The :py:attr:`~metatomic.torch.o3.O3Transformation.is_improper` property is true
exactly when the matrix has negative determinant.

Wigner-D matrices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Wigner-D matrices are computed when first requested by an
:py:class:`O3Transformation` and then reused. Cartesian-only operations do not build
them.

Complex Wigner-D matrices are computed by the `wigners <https://github.com/luthaf/wigners>`_
package, using the convention

.. math::

    D^{\ell}_{m',m}(\alpha, \beta, \gamma) = \langle \ell, m' |
        e^{-i J_z \alpha} e^{-i J_y \beta} e^{-i J_z \gamma} | \ell, m \rangle,

with ZYZ Euler angles :math:`(\alpha, \beta, \gamma)` extracted from the proper part of
:math:`R`, i.e. from :math:`R` itself when :math:`\det R = 1`, or from :math:`-R` when
:math:`\det R = -1`, such that this proper part equals :math:`R_z(\alpha) R_y(\beta)
R_z(\gamma)`.

These are then converted to real Wigner-D matrices through the unitary
change of basis :math:`T` mapping complex spherical harmonics
:math:`Y_{\ell}^{m}` to real ones:

.. math::

    Y_{\ell, m}^{\text{real}} = \begin{cases}
        \dfrac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left( Y_{\ell}^{-m} + (-1)^m Y_{\ell}^{m} \right)
            & m > 0 \\[6pt]
        Y_{\ell}^{0} & m = 0 \\[6pt]
        \dfrac{i}{\sqrt{2}} \left( Y_{\ell}^{m} - (-1)^m Y_{\ell}^{-m} \right)
            & m < 0
    \end{cases}

so that the real Wigner-D matrix is :math:`D^{\ell}_{\text{real}} = T^{*} D^{\ell} T^{T}`.

For an improper rotation (a rotation composed with an inversion), Cartesian axes are
flipped as part of the transformation matrix itself, while spherical axes pick up an
extra parity factor :math:`(-1)^{\ell} \sigma`. Here :math:`\ell` and
:math:`\sigma` are the matching ``o3_lambda`` and ``o3_sigma`` labels from the
block key. Only :math:`\sigma=+1` (a proper representation) and
:math:`\sigma=-1` (a pseudo representation) are accepted.

Multiple systems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When several systems are transformed, list order determines the pairing:
``transformations[i]`` is used for ``systems[i]``. The integer ``system_ids[i]``
identifies that system in a block's ``"system"`` sample column. For example, if
``system_ids = [92, 38]``, samples labelled ``92`` use ``transformations[0]`` and
samples labelled ``38`` use ``transformations[1]``.

Each identifier must be unique. A block may contain samples for only some of the
systems, but every ``"system"`` label present in the block must appear in
``system_ids``. A gradient sample points to its parent value sample through its
``"sample"`` label and uses the same transformation as its parent. When only one
system is supplied, all samples use its transformation; the ``"system"`` column is
optional and, if present, ignored.

Reference
---------

.. autoclass:: metatomic.torch.o3.O3Transformation
    :members:

.. autofunction:: metatomic.torch.o3.random_transformations

.. autofunction:: metatomic.torch.o3.transform_system

.. autofunction:: metatomic.torch.o3.transform_tensor

.. autofunction:: metatomic.torch.o3.transform_block
